And then I'm sure there'll be questions from members.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you members of the committee.
I'm joined obviously by Minister Todd McClay, by Chief Executive of
NZTE, Peter Crisp, who I know is well known to you
already. I'm going to make some very brief remarks and then hand over to
Minister McClay. As you know, New Zealand is a small, geographically
remote trading nation, and our long-term prosperity depends on our ability to
compete internationally, grow exports, and support businesses to expand
successfully into global markets.
And that is why export growth, doubling New Zealand's exports, sits
at the center of the government's Going for Growth program.
NZTE plays a very important role within that wider program by
helping New Zealand businesses grow internationally, diversify markets,
and navigate what has been an increasingly uncertain global environment.
And I just want to acknowledge at the outset that that environment for exporters
remains challenging. Exporters are dealing with freight disruption, tariff
uncertainty, geopolitical instability, rising insurance and
shipping costs, and softer global conditions in some markets.
Despite all of that, we should all take our hat off to New Zealand's exporters
because exports were worth around 114 billion to the economy in
2025, and rose nearly 12%
over the past year, despite all the curveballs that got thrown at our
exporters. NZTE has continued to deliver very strong and
measurable outcomes in that context.
They have supported export deals reaching 4.83 billion, and that's against a
target of 2.7 billion, so a great result.
International growth outcomes increased from
2,771 to a record 3,832.
And the customers that they work with are speaking about them more
positively than ever, which they use quantitative measures
to assess.
The government itself is, of course, continuing to strengthen our international
trade and investment connections, including concluding
negotiations on the India Free Trade Agreement.
I want to acknowledge the Labour Party for pledging their support for that
agreement. I think that's a very important bipartisan commitment.
We've progressed implementation of the UAE Agreement to resolve non-tariff barriers
affecting around $600 million worth of trade, and delivered 23 trade
missions this parliamentary term, involving more than 390 business
delegates and generating over 200 commercial outcomes with a potential value
exceeding two billion. Again, I want to acknowledge that members across Parliament
have been part of those missions. And the India
Agreement in particular represents a significant long-term opportunity for New
Zealand exporters in one of the world's largest and fastest-growing markets.
Lots to say about the estimates on the budget,
but I'm going to hand over to Minister McClay and look forward to the committee's
questions.
Well, thank you so much, colleagues.
My apologies, I've got a bit of a flu, so I'll keep away from you.
And my voice is not gone yet. But also, a little bit earlier, a migraine
kicked in, so it's very wavy. So Damien, you've never looked better.
But anyway, so I'm a bit slower.
All key nerves are-
If I'm
a bit slow, my apologies. I just echo Minister Willis'
comments. And firstly to focus on and thank not only the
trade officials in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
negotiators, but particularly New Zealand Trade and Enterprise.
It is more challenging for New Zealanders everywhere in the world at the moment,
but I think the performance of our exporters and the work that NZTE has been
doing is exceptional. We've seen an increase in
our exports at $114 billion for the first time.
That's compounded at just about 8% growth per year.
You'll know that the government set the ambitious target of doubling the value of
exports over 10 years. In fact, I know that the Labour Party,
a year after the election, joined us on that and said it was an admirable
achievement to focus on and that they would join it.
And so we are on track. That's not surprising, but
largely what you would expect to see is more growth towards the middle and the end
of the 10 years than the beginning. So we're starting from a very good point.
The reason we did that, in particular on value, is we all know that
the export economy drives jobs in New Zealand, and so it's very important
we give all the access that we can.
Just around where that growth is, it is very challenging
everywhere, but we're seeing New Zealand exporters do well almost
uniformly across the board. There is a phenomenon that says if you have a trade
agreement, your trade grows up a lot more than otherwise.
But even when you don't, you have more trade.
European Union FTA, thank you to your committee, you worked
very hard to get it through and into force, I think
the fastest we've ever been able to do that in Parliament.
And there's nothing but upside for New Zealand.
There's an extra $3 billion worth of exports, predominantly from the primary sector
in the first two years. The UK FTA just a few weeks ago was
three years old, and we've seen almost 80%
growth in exports from New Zealand during that period of time.
The UAE FTA in the first six months from entering into force, we've got 34%
increase in exports. That has tapered off, of course, as a result of what's
happening in the Middle East, but there is still great interest in New
Zealand and demand there. China this year we're at $23
billion of exports for the very first time.
We're one of the few countries in the world to have a trade surplus with China.
We will
sell them more than we buy.
And the US, which is interesting, with the uncertainty
of the changing nature of their tariff regime policy from
10% on deliberation day to 15%
as a result of having a very modest trade surplus against them.
That regime was found to be illegal.
We went back to 10%, and now it looks like
12.5% is what will be levied. Even with that uncertainty of
those tariff rates, US consumers are paying more because our exports have
gone up by about 4% by value. So there's huge opportunity
there. The final bit of this is NZTE's role in all this.
It's to help New Zealand companies-
They react to where there is interest and demand.
So when New Zealanders put extra interest or demand into one part of the world,
they realign their
network and their activity or efforts to support that.
One of the things I've asked them and want to look at over the coming 12
months is whether we should react to the
demand that is demonstrated by our exporters, or we should support them more
and help lead them to market. I.e., if you're an exporter who's doing well in one
market,
can we say to you, "Have you thought about going over here as well?
Because you could do well there also." And some of those new FTAs
give us real opportunity. India as an example.
Our trade with India is modest at some billions of dollars
two-way. Exponentially, it has the opportunity to be
as important to us as the China free trade agreement.
So should we wait for exporters to find their way there organically, although
there's been a 34% increase in interest and activity from
New Zealand, or should we be saying to companies that are doing well in parts of
the world, "Do you know what? You can also do well in the Indian market.
We'll work with you." And so we're working through what the implications might be
of that, although I would argue there's only upside. With that, Mr.
Chair, I'll stop, and I look forward to always the most intelligent
questions from any committee. This-
Excellent. Well, we'll get to those, but we'll start with the Honorable Damien
O'Connor.
He's voting for the Indian deal. Be nice to him.
Thanks for that. Or re. I've had a run-in today.
Look, thank you very much and appreciate all the work that is going on.
Mr. Chris won't be surprised by perhaps the tone of my
questions. We appreciate the growth strategy, but I guess the question is growth
for who?
And while Invest New Zealand is not strictly
speaking within this purview, we're not quite sure where it will be
investigated, but it has been--
or the question to you is,
the collective responsibility for that investment was
at the table here,
and we presume will continue in that way.
Did you-- Sorry, the table you mean for this committee?
Sorry, Damien, the three people at the end of the table.
Yeah.
Unfortunately not at this end, but anyway.
The point is that,
what percentage of that focus will be new greenfields
investment-
Yeah
... and what will be mergers and acquisitions?
Mm-hmm.
And what is the difference and the impact and the approach that
government has taken-
Sure
... in this area? Because two of our star companies,
Rocket Lab and Halter, are both now effectively US-owned,
almost fully US-owned. And does the government consider that's a good
investment strategy or not so good?
Well, why don't I start with that. Firstly, New Zealand Trade and Enterprise has no
responsibility for foreign direct investment.
There is a new agency set up with an act of Parliament, which is Invest New
Zealand. Your committee is responsible to scrutinize that but has chosen not to
this year. You've asked New Zealand Trade and Enterprise to come along.
I'm the minister responsible for investment and therefore the new
investment agency. So more broadly, I can say that the
only change that has taken place from when NZTE had
responsibility is a focus on driving in investment that's good for
New Zealand and good for New Zealanders. The new agency has been set up.
They are light of people. We don't want it to be very large and bureaucratic, and
we have given the mandate of finding investment to bring to the country that helps
grow. You're going to grow the economy.
So as an example, Damien, in previous meetings you've asked about
land and farms and roads and buildings and all sorts of things being sold.
Their predominantly focus is around renewable energy.
There's some interest in data centers, there's interest in tech and so on.
How can we bring investment overseas and grow things in the country that were
not going to happen anyway? I've been very clear with them.
I don't want them merely
piggybacking what might happen. I want them to add actual value to the
economy, and we've been very focused on that.
But if you wanted to call them in, you're able to do so, and I'm happy to come
along and focus on the Invest New Zealand part of the
deliberations. Today is about New Zealand Trade and
Enterprise.
Yes. Well, to follow on, I appreciate that because it's trade and enterprise.
So in the enterprise area,
what is the focus? We appreciate the trade area, but the
enterprise area of assisting grow businesses within
New Zealand, exclusive of the investment part,
and how is that operating?
Yeah. Well, within that, it is very much
focused upon those who export. So it
is not at the stage necessarily of finding companies that could export.
It's those that are, and how do we grow them very, very quickly.
It's a very interesting question, though, in as far as how do we take companies
that could export and are not, and how do we mentor them and grow them?
It's something that we've been working through.
But
we have been doing with NZTE what the private sector is doing, being
very, very focused with the resource that we have in how we can
help companies grow and scale and export more.
And I think that's part of the reason you've seen of the 23 trade missions we've
done to 18 countries, we have selected
companies, some that have never been on a trade mission before, some who have,
and those $2 billion worth of commitments or potential exports
as addition that is a result of that.
But Pete, I don't know whether you want to talk in a bit more-
I think it's worth noting that the way that NZTE focuses its
activity is it's got those 1,000 New Zealand businesses that it's
particularly focused on, and the goal there is to
help them scale and grow internationally.
But when they're picking that top 1,000, their focus is
on ensuring that they will have clear
additionality to New Zealand, so that their growth will benefit New Zealand,
whether that's in the form of increased jobs, employment opportunities,
higher value jobs,
contribution back to the country.
And so they're always looking for what are the firms that have the opportunity for
the greatest impact when they expand internationally Um, we can
add value, and they'll have impact.
And then you've got the next set of 5,000 businesses that are in
an earlier stage of their export journey, but that NZTE judges, with some more
support, have real potential to grow.
Tim, thank you. And it is on the basis of growing those, assisting
them grow
some of them through export, most likely over time.
But what is the government's approach to the growth of
those companies?
How big should they get?
And does it matter who owns them?
Well, look, I think the reason that we care about them growing is that we
know that when a firm is earning more export income, they are more able to
employ more staff here in New Zealand, creating more job
opportunities here in New Zealand.
We know that when they grow, they are able to pay higher incomes
to the people that they employ, creating opportunities for New Zealand.
They are better able to provide training opportunities.
They're better able to invest in their own innovation, often
investing in research and development and capital
into our communities. And obviously, the way that
we judge it is how much benefit are you adding to the New
Zealand economy. And, I think if you were to talk to people on the
Mahia Peninsula, they'd say they're much better off with Rocket Lab
than without.
Next question, Dr. Lawrence Yuen.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you so much for coming.
I just got
a few questions around,
I guess, the core work and operation of NZTE, and following
on from your comments before, Minister.
The first one is around when we're looking at the challenging global trade
landscape. You mentioned the impact that the war has on the
NZ-UAE CEPA. Can I just check, how
then do you
manage and respond to those challenges, particularly with
our thousand companies from an NZTE perspective?
How do you update them and what's the feedback have you been hearing from them?
Can I just really congratulate NZTE on how proactive they've been in this space?
So immediately on the conflict in the Middle East breaking out, they sought to
provide information to the businesses that they support, that
broader group.
Mm.
And they've held many seminars. You'll have the data. Seminars, webinars.
They've made themselves available to exporters to provide them detailed information
and to offer that support, and they've been able to offer the government traffic
light reports on what we're hearing from our exporters about the impact on them.
So that has been a real focus for activity.
Yeah. I mean,
we know there's about 400 of the 1,000 companies that are going into
the Middle East.
Yeah.
So we know their target markets.
As Minister Willa said, we ran a regular traffic light with them.
Was actually a skill we learned during COVID.
So the,
having the credibility to have regular contact with the companies, and they tell
you how they're getting on.
Mm.
We know from that traffic light information that 56% of them, it started off about
40%, think about 56% of them were
quite badly affected by the crisis.
Most of the time, they wanted to know what was going on.
Mm.
So we teamed up with MFAT, with MPI, with MBIE,
and ran a regular Friday seminar
series. We had anything from 500 to 800
companies coming on to those seminars.
And from that, you can distill from the questions what type of additional services-
Mm
... you need to offer. So not just information, but then we've got a freight
advisory service.
We had a port relocation service
to figure out what's the best port to get into the Middle East.
A whole lot of other sort of boutique and downstream services based on individual
company needs.
But, I mean, specifically focusing on the budget and the estimates, does that
bring about capacity issues, for example, for NZTE?
Or is it something that's still manageable within the bottom line of NZTE?
So it's something that's manageable.
I mean, there are shocks that come to exporters all the time.
You just need to think about over the last three or four years-
True
... there are many things that have been challenging for some of our exporters up
to Europe because of, you know, the illegal war and an
invasion-
Yeah
... from Russia to Ukraine have felt challenges.
There's been disruption to freight.
But even the US, with the changing nature of their tariff regime upon New
Zealanders-
Yeah
... you know, there's been a lot of work we've done.
So within baseline, we have the expertise there.
It's a matter of focusing it for a period of time-
Yeah
... for where the need most is, but it doesn't have an impact upon overall
work that NZTE does.
That's really good to hear in terms of the flexibility as it-- So my second part of
the question is,
Minister, of course you will know, you know, with the NZ India
FTA, and particularly we're looking at chapter nine around investment,
what is NZTE's role then on looking at that US
$20 billion investment into India?
So it's-- I want to be clear that it's not a commitment on the part of the
government to invest $20 billion.
It is to promote, and we've been through this in detail, as I know you've had
officials and experts before the committee.
So when New Zealand takes on obligations and trade agreements, irrespective of what
they are, we take it very seriously. All governments have.
And New Zealand is no an- Around the world for honoring its commitments.
In fact, if other countries were as studious and serious
about this as New Zealand is, then the world would be a much better place.
Ultimately, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is taking
responsibility for the overall look at the implementation of the
free trade agreement. Of course, it's not in force yet, and they, with
other agencies, including New Zealand Trade Enterprise, are looking at the approach
around how we can meet our obligation to promote investment.
As an example, the definition of, or the understanding of what investment
is probably is narrower than it should be.
Here are three examples since the signing of investment that would count
towards that, albeit that they're modest.
The first is a New Zealand bed manufacturer who's decided to invest $200
million in a manufacturing facility in India,
predominantly to some parts of selling to that market, but in some of the
other markets around India where they have free trade agreements.
It's a $200 million investment. That's very good for New Zealand because it's a New
Zealand company that owns it, and it will add ability, and they'll have their own
staff there. Secondly was Velocity, which is a New Zealand tech
company that provides
high-level tech
solutions to the financial services and banks.
During the signing, before the signing of the FTA, they signed an agreement
with India's third largest bank, which could well be as large as any New Zealand
bank, and that was a $20 million initial contract for them to
provide their services. They've said they're setting up an office there where
there'll be New Zealanders and Indians
working. And the third is Air New Zealand have indicated when we were up there for
the signing that they want to put three people in market and offices to get ready
for direct flights at some stage. So this is all investment.
Our job in that case is to track it so we can show the Indian
government on an ongoing basis as we evaluate both sides, how
the FTA is working, what is happening there.
And then secondly, as you have seen trade missions,
23 of them over the last three years from the government.
You could expect to see our network in India and elsewhere
helping New Zealanders who might want to invest go and open up an office because
they want to help India build airports or build roads and build bridges or
buildings and so on. So there will be a range of those sorts of things, but
as we move towards the FTA entering into force, a lot of the work
about full implementation is being planned for now.
I'm just, I guess, in the context of the budget, a little bit surprised that there
is all of this work that's being done, but we haven't seen an increase in the
appropriation for NZTE in order to build capacity.
I see. No, but that's because you're misassuming spending money with achieving
something. That's not necessarily the best way to do things.
So ultimately, there is no question that resource is
needed. But you might have heard us say earlier, what we do is adjust to where
there is demand. So-
Where there's the most opportunity.
Most opportunity.
So prioritizing resources.
So I guess where is being prioritized then?
So
the mistake would be made to allocate money now to be spent in the out years
until the work is fully done.
Okay.
The FTA has not entered into force yet.
So I would expect that once it enters into force and we have the plan together,
that NZTE with others will look at how they reprioritize and
what resource we might need to monitor.
That makes sense. Cool.
Look at it in a really practical sense.
If you think about those thousand focus firms,
well, with an India FTA in place, when
NZTE are meeting with those thousand focus firms, obviously India is going to be
far higher on the priority list in that discussion than it was
previously. That doesn't fundamentally increase the volume of work.
It changes the focus of the work.
Yeah.
Yeah, that said, there's two-
I was going to say, give you an example.
You might remember last year, the European Union Trade Commissioner came to New
Zealand, and there were 500 European and New Zealand companies that did a trade and
investment meeting summit. It was on the anniversary of the FTA.
I could envisage, in fact, he suggested we should do one of the other direction,
take New Zealand companies up to Europe and do trade and investment there.
I can envisage us doing a lot of that in the coming years in India,
as an example, as we should in the Middle East, and as we should one day perhaps,
as things are calmer back in the US.
The reason for that is it gives New Zealand companies the opportunity
to have exposure, to meet like-minded partners, and to find those opportunities.
So we shouldn't think of it just we have to go out and just do one thing in
investment. Actually, trade and investment through a trade agreement go together
because NZTE and New Zealand companies are very good at seeking
out opportunities.
No, thank you so much.
Wonderful day.
Can I just make one follow-up comment?
Yeah.
I think there's two key principles when you're running a department like this.
One is that over time, you have to get more for less.
That is just the basic reality. The private sector, it's called productivity.
You have to lift your productivity over time.
So you have to expect to spend more and get greater output.
So that's a huge challenge, but that's essentially the name of the game.
Secondly, as the minister says, you have to keep a certain flexibility.
It means you have to know exactly where the greatest customer demand
is coming from and then allocate your resources accordingly.
And if you're not quick enough with that or responsive enough with that, you'll be
left with overcapacity in one area and undercapacity in the other area.
So you have to be prepared to move your resources around and stay very close to it.
With those two principles, you should be able to navigate most of the situation
in front of you.
Look, thank you, and I just want to go back to the, I
guess, the enterprise productivity area, which just off the back of what you said.
So we appreciate that productivity, growth, output,
but the question that is floating around is retention of the wealth from
that productivity, whether it stays here.
In the last two years since you've been in government, I guess
we've seen
sale of the best, the brightest.
Halter sold to the US, Fonterra sold to the French, or their
consumer business sold to the French, and Alliance, one of the
biggest meat companies, sold to the Irish.
Do you consider that those are positive outcomes or negative
outcomes for our long-term wealth retention?
Well, I think there's something really important to remember, which is
that the
dividend, for example, that the Fonterra farmers got is
not lost to New Zealand. In fact, what we're seeing
right now, according to the banks and commercial partners in rural
communities that I've spoken with, is yes, some farmers
are using those funds to pay down their debt to provide for more financial
security, which is a benefit to them and their communities.
Others are actually investing in those Halter systems or in an upgraded milking
platform that will be more productive.
Others are able to pay their staff more than may have been otherwise the case.
And I'll give you another example. Where did Halter come from?
Well, actually, the man who started Halter had been an engineer at
Rocket Lab, and what he had in the form of Peter Beck was an extraordinary
mentor and an example of a business that gave him the heart
and courage to aspire to create Halter.
And I think often we focus on when part of a business sells or
part of its equity goes offshore, we see it as
lost to New Zealand. But actually,
very often what happens is that the person who has been
given the payment for that then chooses to reinvest it
in New Zealand, either in the form of becoming an angel investor themselves,
helping the next venture, helping the next entrepreneur, by investing more
in their own community through philanthropic effort, through making their
own developments at home. So I don't think it's right to say that every
time someone sells part of their business to New Zealand that we lose
it. In fact, there's really good examples up and down our economy of people
reinvesting back into this place because they love it.
And if you were to have Peter Beck here,
I think he'd say that his commitment to New Zealand is the absolute-
I just think, thank you, Minister, for that. I think we'd agree with that.
But I guess overall are you seeing a trend where you
start to see that the question of whether that is in New Zealand's best
long-term interest? Of course, there will be examples, but that's not
always the case with wealth, which rightfully goes to the owners
of the companies over time.
Well, I think you and I share an objective that I would like to see New
Zealand's capital markets deepen over time so that
when our businesses are growing and need extra
capital, that they can source more of that in New Zealand.
Now, what is the path to that? Well, in part, we have government capital
contributions in the Elevate Fund and the Scout Fund and the Aspire
Fund, under the guardians of the New Zealand Superannuation Fund, which
are actively investing in some of these venture firms, whether
it's Dawn Aerospace or others, which is a New Zealand government
stake in their growth.
The government itself has made direct investments.
I think of the partnership we formed with OpenStar Technology, who are
working on breakthrough nuclear energy solutions.
But I also look at the KiwiSaver funds and the growing role I expect
they will have in the future. As we have a deeper pool of savings capital in New
Zealand, I'm expecting that those funds will have more opportunity to
invest capital in our own growing New Zealand venture firms.
It's been a criticism of New Zealand's economy over,
gosh, 20, 30 years, almost as long as you've been in parliament, Mr.
O'Connor,
respectfully.
31 years.
Sorry. With all the wisdom you have accumulated, that we've had shallow
capital markets, and that does mean that the options for sourcing capital for
growth in New Zealand have been more limited than we'd like them.
So deepening those over time is absolutely within the government's growth agenda.
But if I may add a couple of examples of government and partnership, because there
is still New Zealand ownership. You take Dawn Meat's investment, it's not
wholesale, it actually is a partnership.
And if you ask the farmers that are part of the
cooperative who made the decision for themselves as the owner, they saw
benefit in capitalizing and growing and believe that there will be
a better return for them and other New Zealanders.
The problem you've got, if you take your question a little bit further, is
from a policy point of view, the ability for New Zealand government to say to
private owners, "We will restrict or ban you from doing the following sorts
of things." I know that's not what you're suggesting.
Actually, investment from overseas, if it's good for New Zealand, can allow us to
do things we couldn't otherwise. In fact, from time immemorial, the
economy's based upon others coming and investing with us and growing things
at home that make them larger and better than they would've been without them
often.
Excellent. Ministers, I think,
well, I want to congratulate you on the 8% achievement so far per year
in terms of growth, trying to meet that double export value target.
It's ambitious. 7% is the 10-year
requirement to double, so 8 is tracking well on that.
In terms of that investment piece we've just been discussing,
I look at companies like Halter, started in the Waikato on a dairy farm-
Shameless
... outside Morrinsville, and then I look at last week's field days,
which I thought had an incredibly high level of optimism, a very positive
vibe, and some great interaction from international investors
and other partners as well. To me, it seems quite clear that
we must have more foreign capital to help grow, and that actually that capital
here goes towards growing and creating jobs domestically.
Is that what you see as being part of achieving that double goal?
Certainly, foreign direct investment can create jobs, and in many areas it comes to
the economy to do things that wouldn't have happened otherwise, or it makes it
happen a lot faster. So I said earlier, from the point of view, and I know it's not
for this hearing, but Invest New Zealand, I'll be very clear to them, I want them
to either make things happen faster than they would've been without them, or to go
and add their expertise on behalf of the taxpayer for areas that wouldn't have
happened, not merely help things that we're going to anyway.
That's how we add real value. But if you take Ireland and Singapore, for example,
have a very similar approach to this.
The amount of foreign direct investment they bring into their economies is
significantly larger than New Zealand.
We sit below the OECD average. Now, we should compare
ourselves to like-minded countries and try and achieve that, because both in
Ireland and in Singapore, investment that goes into the
tech space and services alone has grown those economies quite
significantly. We often talk a lot in trade and a lot of the work that
NZTE does around
tangible goods, food and fiber and things like that, very important to New
Zealand. But I think the next three to six years, where you'll see
exceptional step change in not
only job creation and earnings for New Zealand, but exports will
be in tech and services and in innovation.
The field day is a celebration of every farmer.
It is about agricultural technology more than the animals or the
fruit that's being grown. And you've heard me say probably last year when I was
here, years ago, we sold a lot of apples to the US.
About three years ago, machines that pack and sort apples that
were designed and manufactured in New Zealand export have earned us more than
those apples do. And to the person that's working in the factory making those
machines or picking the apples, it's just a job that pays them higher than if
their employer wasn't involved in export.
Yeah, look, my simple attitude is if someone from another country wants to use
their money to help us create Kiwi jobs and pay our workers
better- Good news. And there's three graphs
that I always contemplate from an economic perspective.
One, the graph that has us hovering down the bottom for how welcoming we are of
foreign direct investment. Second, the graph that shows we have very low rates of
capital intensity in our firms. And third, the graph that shows low
rates of productivity over time. I think those three things are
correlated. If we want to lift productivity and wages, we need greater rates of
capital intensity. If we want greater rates of capital intensity, it's likely
some of that capital is going to come from offshore.
Can I--
Just off the back of that , Minister, you acknowledged the fact that we are
building up considerable wealth through KiwiSaver, through
superannuation, through ACC, those funds.
Do you think there should be a mandated percentage of that fund
invested in our country?
What I'm mindful of is a
couple of things. The first is, particularly with KiwiSaver funds, those are
the savings of individual New Zealanders.
In a sense, it's their private property.
And I can understand any New Zealander who says, "I want my retirement nest
egg to earn the maximum possible. Don't you, government, expropriate it and
tell me what I have to do with it. I just want it to earn the most possible, and I
want to have freedom over how I invest it." Equally, every time
I meet a KiwiSaver fund provider, I say to them, "Hey, what are you doing to
make sure you're expanding your investment in this great growing economy?"
And what they tell me is that as their funds build up over time, very much they
want to deepen their investment in this market.
And you've seen with the New Zealand Super Fund that it has a track record of doing
that. Often what those larger funds will say is that they're looking for investable
opportunities. And there are opportunities like that.
The name of the amazing business has just left my head, but I'm going to return to
you, Mr. Chair, with it. But an example of that is ACC are invested in
a company, with its manufacturing base in Auckland, that is manufacturing
protein-rich food products that they're selling to aged care
facilities around the world.
Pure Food.
Pure Food. And part of how they have had their growth trajectory
accelerated is an investment from ACC.
Now, investments like that from Super Fund, ACC, KiwiSaver, I think we
will see more of them in the future. Certainly, that's what I want to see.
But I am mindful that we're also looking for good returns from those funds, so if
we get our hands too in there telling them what to do, um, and their
funds reduce, then that has an impact on every taxpayer.
Just on that company, if I may. So they've come out of New Zealand, they've built a
presence in Australia, they're an NZTE client, and they're up in France now, and
they're working away with
the French government and others of many of the states there-
Yeah
... looking at providing their high-value nutrition for seniors
into rest homes. And the French government has an approach where they want to do a
lot more of that. So that's just an example of where investment, from New
Zealand, and it started out moms and dads and friends putting money in.
Without additional capital,
they couldn't have grown the way they were.
I think you're going to see significant, hear a lot about them in the
future. When I met with them in Paris to talk a bit about
what they were doing, and then asked about their investment, they're very pleased
with the investment they got. They said, "We're taken anywhere because we can go
and beat the world. We just need capital." And they also said, "If some of
that capital comes from overseas, it actually helps us because we get to meet
people and do things we couldn't otherwise if it was just mom and dad at home
helping us."
That's a very cool New Zealand story because the founder was an investment
banker whose
father-in-law couldn't find digestible food,
and so he invented the whole company to solve that problem with his father-in-law.
Now he's sitting on a really big company.
So it'd be good for all of us at some stage.
Yeah.
Could we get him into Bellamy's, do you think?
Well, he's really building off the New Zealand provenance and quality story
as well. So it's a great story for how New Zealand food moves up the value chain
because it's very much a scientific technological business.
Yeah.
It's about getting
protein from
what we grow and putting that into a digestible form for senior people.
Very good. All right. Look, I'm just conscious we're over time, but thank you very
much for your time this morning, Minister.
Thanks so much.
This afternoon, rather. Really appreciate it. And Mr.
Crisp, I understand you're leaving NZTE-
Yes
... to take up the reins of Parliament.
This will be the last time you see me.
Thank you. Yeah. Yes. Thank you very much for your contribution to NZTE.
After 16 years, he's going off to-
Okay
... graze.
Sustained period.
I'm sure you'll all join us in acknowledging that Peter Crisp's
tenure as chief executive has been one of exceptional performance,
and we're extremely grateful to him for his leadership of NZTE,
and are very confident that he has grown a next generation of leaders who will keep
it going forth in great stead.
And can I just say-
Absolutely.
The final comment from me is that I've always respected this
forum. And I often do a blog. You've seen me videoing at this
forum from time to time because I tell a story to all our people overseas, 40
offices, 36 offices overseas.
Some of them aren't in democracies and tell them
how important this institution is, the importance of Select Committees,
of scrutiny, of a working parliamentary democracy.
So we've always taken this forum very seriously, always providing straight
and clear answers.
We're always too straight.
You're a bit shouty today.
And
I will fix that.
And, so I've really enjoyed the cross-party support for the
efforts.
It's funny because I've got a different recollection from when I was in opposition.
You never answered the bloody questions.
Very good. All right. Thanks.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.